[[!meta copyright="Copyright © 2009, 2013, 2015 Free Software Foundation,
Inc."]]

[[!meta license="""[[!toggle id="license" text="GFDL 1.2+"]][[!toggleable
id="license" text="Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant
Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license
is included in the section entitled [[GNU Free Documentation
License|/fdl]]."]]"""]]

[[!tag faq/support faq/_important]]

[[!meta title="what hardware is supported? What drivers does GNU/Hurd have?"]]

As of September 2024, if you want to run the Hurd in real hardware,
old Thinkpads are known to work well. We recommend the X200, T400, or
T500 Thinkpads, which support internet connectivity via the ethernet
port.  Those laptops support a maximum of 8GB of RAM, and you could
use libreboot with an SSD!  You could probably purchase one of those
used laptops for about $200 or less.  Be sure to read about the
[[current status of the Hurd|hurd/status]].  Until we fix the
libdiskfs/ext2fs issues on the [[64 bit port|faq/64-bit]], we
recommend you use the 32 bit version of the Hurd.

A cheaper option is the T43 (2GB max RAM) or T60 (4 GB max RAM), which
one can find for about $50.

Other hardware that is known to work includes the [[Dell Inspiron
1750|https://logs.guix.gnu.org/hurd/2024-09-28.log]] on i386
Debian/Hurd.  It won't boot with the current installer (June 2023
debian-hurd i386 installer iso) because of an FPU issue (fixed
upstream). I had to remove the optical drive. It Hangs for one minute
during boot on ACPI init, but otherwise fine when disabling full tree
parsing.  The touchpad, keyboard, display, ethernet, and the hard
drive works (in legacy mode).

Currently, for disks Mach integrates old drivers from Linux through some
[[community/gsoc/project_ideas/driver_glue_code]], which provide
IDE disk support, and we have an AHCI driver which provides [[SATA
support|faq/sata_disk_drives]].  [[Rumpdisk|hurd/rump]] lets us use
modern hard drives, like SSDs.

For network boards, we use the [[DDE]] toolkit
to run linux 2.6.32 drivers in userland processes, which provides both long-term
support for new hardware and safety against driver bugs.  Note however that we
have of course not tested all drivers, we obviously don't even have all kinds of
hardware.  So we can not promise that they will all work. What probably
works for sure is what we usually use: the rtl8139 and e1000 drivers for
instance. Firmware loading is not implemented yet.

For graphical mode, Xorg is supported, e.g. with the vesa driver. DRM is not
supported yet.

USB is on its way to getting supported with rumpusbdisk.

[[microkernel/mach/gnumach/ports/Xen]] is also supported, both blkfront and
netfront.
