[[!meta copyright="Copyright © 2026 Free Software Foundation,
Inc."]]

[[!meta license="""[[!toggle id="license" text="GFDL 1.2+"]][[!toggleable
id="license" text="Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant
Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license
is included in the section entitled [[GNU Free Documentation
License|/fdl]]."]]"""]]

[[!tag stable_URL]]

[[!meta title="X"]]

X runs on the Hurd quite well.  Users can pick simple window managers
like i3, awesome-wm, openbox, fluxbox, ice-wm, etc.  Even Xfce runs
well on the Hurd.  Although, we have not been able to run
coreboot and X.  Please reach out if you'd like to help us fix this
bug. Work is underway to port Xlibre.  Users should be able to use either in the near
future.

There are a couple of gotchas when running X on the Hurd.
They are documented in [[Debian GNU/Hurd
wiki|https://www.debian.org/ports/hurd/hurd-install]].  Look for the
X.org section.

Most graphical applications should work just fine.  The main
limitation these days seem to be web browsers.  A few simple web
browsers that work include netsurf, dillo, lynx, and emacs' eww.
Although, as of Feb 2026, users need to compile dillo and netsurf
manually due to `PATH_MAX` issues.  Older versions of Firefox,
LadyBird, and gnome-web used to run on the Hurd, so a motivated
developer could port a newer version.

As of February 2026, the Hurd has [[minimal sound
support|hurd/rump/rumpsound]], so please do not expect any
applications to support audio output.

It should be possible to [[port wayland|open_issues/wayland]].
Contributions in that direction are always welcome!
