[[!meta copyright="Copyright © 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016 Free Software Foundation,
Inc."]]

[[!meta license="""[[!toggle id="license" text="GFDL 1.2+"]][[!toggleable
id="license" text="Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant
Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license
is included in the section entitled [[GNU Free Documentation
License|/fdl]]."]]"""]]

[[!meta title="FOSDEM 2016"]]

<http://fosdem.org/2016>

FOSDEM will take place on January 30st/31st at the Université Libre de
Bruxelles.


# Who and When

[[!table class="table_style_1" data="""
"Name","Attending","Arrival","Return"
"Justus Winter","yes","",""
"Ludovic Courtès","yes","",""
"Manolis Ragkousis","yes","",""
"Samuel Thibault","yes","Saturday, 09:17 BRU","Sunday, 19:13 BRU"
"[[Thomas Schwinge|tschwinge]]","yes","Friday, 17:35, Bruxelles Midi","Sunday, 18:25, Bruxelles Midi"
"""]]


# GNU Guile devroom

<https://fosdem.org/2016/schedule/track/gnu_guile/>

  * {{$ragkousis_guix_hurd}}


This presentation will be a guided tour of porting Guix and its package collection to a new platform, with the specifics of GNU/Hurd. We will discuss the current status of the project. Next we will raise the problems we faced and how we solved them. Finally we wiil present a road map for porting GuixSD, the standalone system distribution on GNU/Hurd.



# Microkernels devroom

<https://fosdem.org/2016/schedule/track/microkernels/>

  * {{$thibault_hurd}}



The Hurd recently saw some experimental work to add sound support. This was done thanks to the Rump kernel, embedded in a library. As a first-working implementation the library is directly linked into mplayer, but of course we plan to make this much more flexible by moving the Rump sound driver into a separate translator, very much like we did for network drivers with netdde. This however poses design questions. The other hardware bit missing on the Hurd is USB support, which we should be able to add a similar way. This poses yet more design questions, as to the shape of the hird of translators we should start for this. This will of course also be the opportunity to give the now-traditional yearly latest news about the Hurd.


[[!ymlfront data="""

ragkousis_guix_hurd:

  "presentation by Manolis Ragkousis: [*Adding GNU/Hurd support to GNU Guix*](https://fosdem.org/2016/schedule/event/guixhurd/) ([slides](https://fosdem.org/2016/schedule/event/guixhurd/attachments/slides/1219/export/events/attachments/guixhurd/slides/1219/guix_to_hurd_fosdem_20160130.pdf))"

thibault_hurd:

  "presentation (including video) by Samuel Thibault: [*Hurd, Rump kernel, sound, and USB*](https://fosdem.org/2016/schedule/event/microkernels_hurd_rump_sound_usb/) ([slides](https://fosdem.org/2016/schedule/event/microkernels_hurd_rump_sound_usb/attachments/slides/951/export/events/attachments/microkernels_hurd_rump_sound_usb/slides/951/2016_01_30_fosdem.pdf))"

"""]]
