[[!meta copyright="Copyright © 2024 Free Software Foundation, Inc."]]

[[!meta license="""[[!toggle id="license" text="GFDL 1.2+"]][[!toggleable
id="license" text="Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant
Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license
is included in the section entitled [[GNU Free Documentation
License|/fdl]]."]]"""]]

[[!meta title="Developer Workflows"]]

[[!toc levels=2]]

Contributing to a free software project for the first time, can be a
little overwhelming.  There's lots of tools that can help you
contribute: autotools,
[[gdb|https://www.sourceware.org/gdb/documentation/]],
[[git|https://git-scm.com/docs/user-manual]], handling lots of email
from mailing lists, text editors, etc.  Don't try to immediately
master everything!  You have time to figure it all out!  Learn a
little bit and go from there.  To help you in that process, this is a
quick guide to get you started contributing to the Hurd:

---

<a id="sending-patches" name="sending-patches"></a>
# Sending Patches

The easiest way to send patches is with `git send-email`.
[[https://git-send-email.io/]] will get you up and running with
sending patches really quickly!

To email your most recent change, you can use `git send-email` like
so:

	$ git send-email -1 --to=bug-hurd@gnu.org

Where `-1` means sending the current (latest) commit; you can do more
than 1 of course. You can do multiple `--to`'s, if you want to send
the patch to multiple lists (e.g. both to libc-alpha and bug-hurd, for
glibc patches), as well as `--cc` to cc specific people. It is a good
idea to cc the people who wrote or last changed the part of code
you are changing.

If you add `--rfc`, the generated subject line will have [RFC PATCH]
instead of [PATCH], which is roughly analogous to WIP MRs on GitLab or
Draft PRs on GitHub, which means that you want to gather feedback, but
don't expect the patches to merged as-is. If you post a modified
version (aka a re-roll) of your patch (set), add -v2 (or -v3, -v4
etc), which will result in e.g. [PATCH v2].

When posting a larger patch series, you might want to generate the
patches and send them in two distinct steps. For this, you can use git
format-patch (with pretty much all the same options); that will
generate a bunch of text files in your cwd that you can edit with your
favorite text editor.

	$ git format-patch -4 --to-bug-hurd@gnu.org \
	    --cover-letter --cc=hurdExpert@gnu.org
	$ git send-email *.patch

It's oftentimes a good idea to give an overview of a patch series; for
this you use `--cover-letter`, which will generate a dummy patch number
0, which you can then write your description over.

<a id="using-git" name="using-git"></a>
# Using Git

Git can be a little tricky to use, if you are not used to it.

	$ git clone https://salsa.debian.org/hurd-team/hurd.git
	$ cd hurd
	$ # make a change to file
	$ git add FILENAME
	$ git commit -m 'trans/hello.c: Fixed a typo in a comment.'

You should probably read some of the documentation from
[git-scm.com](https://git-scm.com/doc).  `man git` is another good
resource.

<a id="text-editors" name="text-editors"></a>
# Using Emacs' Magit

The git command line is fine enough, but Emacs' magit mode makes using
git much easier (my opinion, obviously).  With Magit, you can
trivially re-order commits, easily reword commit messages, commit a
change to an old commit (that is not HEAD), commit only portions of a
file, squash commits togethor, etc.  Magit is probably one of the
easiest ways to work with git.  You could code with any other editor,
but just use Emacs to handle your git workflow.

With magit, it is easy to create patches via highlighting one or more
commits, and one can then type "W" followed by "c".  I personally,
output said patches to the $hurd-src/patches directory. Then I can
send my patches to the mailing list via:

	$ cd $hurd-src/patches
	$ git send-email --to=bug-hurd@gnu.org .

# Using vim-figitive
vim users can use vim-fugitive, which is similiar to Magit.

# Develop the Debian way

You can develop the GNU/Hurd via Debian GNU/Hurd.  This [Hurd wiki
page](https://www.debian.org/ports/hurd/hurd-devel-debian) has more
information.

This page describes how to [[build|hurd/building]] the hurd.
